Allergists
An allergist or immunologist focuses on preventing and treating allergic diseases and conditions. These usually include various types of allergies and asthma.

The American College of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology explain that allergists must complete additional years of study in the field of allergy and immunology after earning a medical degree.

Allergists also require training in internal medicine or pediatrics.

Dermatologists
Dermatologists focus on diseases and conditions of the skin, nails, and hair. They treat conditions such as eczema, skin cancer, acne, and psoriasis.

Dermatologists can perform some in-office procedures, including mole or spot removal. Some also offer aesthetic procedures, such as chemical peels, Botox injections, and dermal fillers.

Infectious disease doctors
Infectious disease doctors specialize in diseases and conditions that are contagious. These may include:

cellulitis
influenza
bacterial infections, including Clostridium difficile, a bacterium that causes diarrhea and stomach issues
infections after surgery or hospital care
tuberculosis
pneumonia
parasite infections
HIV
Infectious disease doctors also require training in internal medicine or pediatrics.

Ophthalmologists
Ophthalmologists specialize in eye and vision care. They treat diseases and conditions of the eyes and can perform eye surgery.

Ophthalmologists treat people with complex eye conditions and may also see people for routine eye care, including prescribing glasses and performing checkups.

Obstetrician/gynecologists
Obstetrician/gynecologists (OB/GYNs) provide preventive care and disease management for female health conditions. These include:

female reproductive health
cancer prevention and diagnosis in the female reproductive organs
breast care
pregnancy
labor and delivery
infertility
menopause
Many women will see an OB/GYN regularly throughout pregnancy and for labor and delivery. They may also visit them for yearly checkups and tests, such as breast exams and Pap tests.

Cardiologists
Cardiologists focus on the cardiovascular system, which includes the heart and blood vessels. They treat many cardiovascular conditions, such as:

high blood pressure
high cholesterol
heart attack and stroke
heart rhythm problems
congestive heart failure
Cardiologists can perform many tests and procedures. However, they do not perform heart surgery.

Cardiologists also require training in internal medicine or pediatrics.

Endocrinologists
Endocrinologists treat disorders and conditions that affect the endocrine system. This system involves various glands that make and release hormones in the body.

Endocrinologists treat hormone-related conditions such as:

diabetes
thyroid conditions
hormone imbalances
infertility
growth problems in children
adrenal gland conditions
Endocrinologists also require training in internal medicine or pediatrics.

Gastroenterologists
Gastroenterologists focus on the digestive system. This includes the esophagus, pancreas, stomach, liver, small intestine, colon, and gallbladder.

Gastroenterologists also perform procedures such as endoscopy, sigmoidoscopy, and colonoscopy.

Gastroenterologists also require training in internal medicine or pediatrics.

Nephrologists
A nephrologist focuses on kidney care and conditions that affect the kidneys. Conditions they can treat include:

kidney disease
renal (kidney) failure
diabetes
kidney stones
lupus
hypertension
Nephrologists also have education in kidney transplants and dialysis.

They also require training in internal medicine or pediatrics.

Urologists
Urologists treat conditions of the urinary tract in both males and females. They also focus on male reproductive health.

Some urologists focus on a specific area within urology, such as female urology or male infertility.

Pulmonologists
Pulmonologists focus on the organs involved with breathing. These include the lungs and heart.

Pulmonologists may work in hospitals to provide ventilation or life support. They also see people in the office to treat breathing disorders, lung conditions, and allergies.

Pulmonologists also require training in internal medicine or pediatrics.

Otolaryngologists
Otolaryngologists are sometimes known as “ear, nose, and throat” (ENT) doctors.

An ENT doctor may treat problems with the sinuses, throat, tonsils, ears, mouth, head, and neck. Some ENT doctors undergo additional training to focus on one specific area, such as pediatrics or rhinology, which refers to the nose and sinuses.
cough,cold,fever etc


Neurologists
A neurologist treats conditions of the nerves, spine, and brain. People may see a neurologist for:

epilepsy
Alzheimer’s disease
Parkinson’s disease
multiple sclerosis
neuropathy
stroke
migraine
Psychiatrists
A psychiatrist is a doctor who treats mental health conditions. They may use counseling, medication, or hospitalization as part of their treatment.

Some psychiatrists have a subspecialty in a specific area, such as adolescent mental health or addiction medicine.

Oncologists
Oncologists treat cancer and its symptoms. During treatment for cancer, a person may have several types of healthcare professional in their care team.

According to the American Cancer Society, some cancer care professionals have specific training in:

certain types of cancer
specific cancer treatments
certain areas of the body
cancer-related health problems
care coordination
Oncologists also require training in internal medicine or pediatrics.

Radiologists
A radiologist specializes in diagnosing and treating conditions using medical imaging tests. They may read and interpret scans such as X-rays, MRIs, mammograms, ultrasound, and CT scans.

They may be one of three types:

Diagnostic radiologists: These doctors use imaging procedures to look for health problems. They can also interpret images on tests and provide information to a person’s doctor about the results.
Interventional radiologists: These doctors use imaging, including X-rays and MRI scans, paired with medical procedures. They may help treat conditions such as heart disease, stroke, and cancer.
Radiation oncologists: These doctors prescribe cancer treatment using radiation therapy.
Rheumatologists
A rheumatologist diagnoses and treats rheumatic diseases. These are autoimmune conditions that can affect the bones, joints, and muscles.

Some common rheumatic diseases include:

rheumatoid arthritis
osteoarthritis
gout
lupus
scleroderma
psoriatic arthritis
Rheumatologists also require training in internal medicine or pediatrics.

General surgeons
General surgeons perform surgical procedures on many organs and bodily systems. They may have training in diseases of the:

abdomen
breast
endocrine system
gastrointestinal system
skin
A general surgeon also cares for a person both before and after their surgery.

Orthopedic surgeons
An orthopedic surgeon specializes in diseases and conditions of the bones, muscles, ligaments, tendons, and joints. They may treat:

arthritis
sports injuries
bone tumors
back pain
broken bones
osteoporosis
repetitive strain injuries, such as carpal tunnel syndrome or tennis elbow
Cardiac surgeons
Cardiac surgeons perform heart surgery and may work with a cardiologist to determine what a person needs.

Cardiac surgeons perform procedures including heart bypass surgery and placing stents in the heart.

Anesthesiologists
Anesthesiologists focus on a person’s well-being before, during, and after surgery. This may include administering pain medicine, relaxation medication, or medicine to put a person to sleep.

Anesthesiologists monitor people during surgery to ensure that their body’s vital signs are stable. They may also work with the person after surgery to make sure that their pain is under control.

MEDICAL NEWS TODAY NEWSLETTER
Knowledge is power. Get our free daily newsletter.
Dig deeper into the health topics you care about most. Subscribe to our facts-first newsletter today.







